[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm
Lisa Garr, and welcome.
Do you think that
the power of prayer
has an effect on healing?
My guest today has helped
change the face of medicine
with his groundbreaking studies
on the scientific connection
between science
and spirituality.
Dr. Larry Dossey has provided
the scientific and medical
proof that spiritual
dimensions work in healing.
Coming from his background as
an internal medicine doctor,
Dr. Dossey has been able
to change the curriculum
in hundreds of medical schools.
His book, "Healing
Words," is now
a part of the curriculum
of medical schools.
And he is here
joining us to talk
about the past, the present,
and the future of healing
and medicine.
Welcome to the show.
>>LARRY DOSSEY:
Great to be here.
Thanks, Lisa.
>>LISA: Thanks for joining me.
So take us back to your days.
Now your book is now in its
20th year, which is amazing.
Take me back to your
early days in medicine
when you were talking
about prayer 20 years ago
in medicine.
>>DOSSEY: Well,
when I first began
talking about
prayer in medicine,
this was not
exactly the best way
to advance your
career in medicine.
Because it just
wasn't on the menu.
It suggested something that
was absolutely outrageous,
that by praying or adopting
healing intentions,
you could affect
somebody at a distance
when they didn't even
know you were doing this.
And so this just-- there
was no place for this.
But there was
something that happened
that made all the difference.
And it has to do with that
little four letter word-- data.
>>LISA: Ah, yes.
>>DOSSEY: Because
back in the 1980s,
people began to put
this idea to the test.
And I will never forget in 1988
when a study was published out
of San Francisco
General Hospital looking
at the ability of prayer to
make a difference in almost
400 patients with heart attack.
And the prayed-for
group did better.
I was shocked by that.
>>LISA: So now, you started
some of these studies.
You were participating in
many of these studies, right?
>>DOSSEY: I am a referee of the
studies, and I analyze them.
But I'm not a basic researcher.
So I look at the studies,
try to make sense of them
and talk about them and explain
them to the professional.
That's been my task.
>>LISA: And you curate them
so that you can bring them
to the general public.
>>DOSSEY: Curator-- I like that.
That's good.
>>LISA: I like that.
You're the curator of ideas.
[BOTH LAUGH] More than
that, I mean, first of all
let's qualify the word "prayer."
You're not talking about a
specific religion or a dogma.
It's just-- what is
prayer in your terms?
>>DOSSEY: Well, in my way
of thinking about prayer,
it's a communication
with the absolute.
And the absolute is my
term for God or Goddess
or Allah or the divine.
>>LISA: Whatever
it means to you.
>>DOSSEY: Whatever one's
tradition means to them.
So I go out of my way not to
mention specific connections
with religion.
And Lisa, one reason I
do this is because in all
of the studies that
have been done,
looking at the ability of
prayer to make a difference,
there is no evidence that
any one specific religion
has cornered the
market on prayer.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
Right.
>>DOSSEY: So I
like this finding.
Because it suggests
that we really
have to be tolerant of a great
variety of religious paths
and spiritual traditions.
>>LISA: So why do you use
the word "prayer" instead
of "intention" or
"visualization" or "focus?"
>>DOSSEY: Well, I find that
in America, where 90% of women
pray regularly and about 80% of
men, people understand prayer.
But if I were to go off talking
about "healing intentions,"
they would say, what?
>>LISA: What is that?
OK, I see.
>>DOSSEY: What is that?
So I just like to
talk in a language
that people understand.
And certainly people
understand-- in America,
they understand what prayer is.
>>LISA: That is true.
I saw a statistic
once come out saying
some over 80% of people
in America believe in God.
>>DOSSEY: No, that's a
good statistic, yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's
something you found as well.
So how does-- exactly
how does this work?
How does the power of prayer
effect lowering blood pressure,
speeding up recovery
times after surgery,
lowering the incidence
of heart attacks?
How does that work?
>>DOSSEY: There are
several mechanisms
that have been proposed.
One is just a simple
relaxation and feeling calm.
People who enter into a
state of prayer or meditation
have long been known to have
good physiological responses
to that.
The blood pressure goes down.
Respirations tend to diminish.
Oxygen demand goes down.
Heart rate tends to fall.
So these are some of
the things that we've
known for a long time
about how prayer benefits
the person who's praying.
Now the interesting
question comes
when you inquire
about how prayer
might affect somebody
else at a distance.
>>LISA: Oh, that's
what it does to you.
OK.
>>DOSSEY: Yes.
And so there are many theories
about how this sort of thing
can work.
I think it's only fair to say
that no one knows currently
what the explanation
will turn out to be.
The going popular notion is
that people are entangled.
This is a concept that comes
from quantum mechanics.
And even though things seem to
be divided and separate and far
apart, quantum
physics gives us a way
of understanding how things can
be separate and at a distance
yet behave as if
they are united.
The pop word is
"entanglement" in physics.
Let me add, though,
that whether or not this
is going to prove to be
the explanation for prayer
is really up in the air.
It's just popular,
but we'll have
to see what idea
floats to the top.
>>LISA: Well, we're
going to explore
all those today and
all sorts of theories
of entanglement and studies.
And that's what
we're doing today
is bridging that gap between the
science and the spirituality.
So now, back when you
were practicing-- well,
when you originally
wrote this book,
there was a different era in
medicine back then, right?
There was more of a
conventional era in medicine.
>>DOSSEY: Yeah, this
idea that doctors
ought to explore using
prayer or healing
intentions with
their own patients
was considered
heresy and blasphemy.
I've actually known doctors--
I have a long list of doctors
who have told me that
they had their hospital
privileges threatened to be
revoked because they were
caught praying with a
patient at the bedside.
>>LISA: You are kidding.
>>DOSSEY: No, I'm not.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>DOSSEY: I think
people today really
underestimate how controversial
this stuff was back
in the '50s, '60s,
'70s, and so on.
Now it's sort of in the
air and in the water.
People don't really
raise an eyebrow
over this kind of thing.
But it wasn't too long
ago where this was not so.
>>LISA: Well, that was
the kind of the Era
I of medicine, so to speak.
And then there
there's another era,
as you've graduated
through the last 20
years, Era II of medicine.
What is that?
>>DOSSEY: Right.
Well, I use Era I to designate
the mechanical approach
to things such as the use of
drugs and surgical procedures.
Those are very mechanical.
But then around World War II,
shortly thereafter, Era II
came on board.
And that's mind-body medicine.
And today, people adapt
to this quite naturally.
Everybody's enrolled
in a meditation or yoga
class it seems.
And imagery and
visualization are
accepted as pretty
important aspects of--
>>LISA: Around what
decade was that?
>>DOSSEY: The late
1940s and early 1950s.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DOSSEY: But these
things in those days
were indeed also
very controversial.
But now they've
just sort of been
incorporated into
conventional medicine.
The exciting thing
is where we begin
to talk about prayer and
distant intentions and so on.
And that gets us
into what I call
Era III, or non-local
medicine, which we'll discuss.
>>LISA: Well the Era III
Medicine is what we're in now.
This is why your book is able
to come out and be a number one
bestseller for-- when it
was originally released.
And it stayed on the bestseller
list for a long time.
Actually, you have
a little story
you told us about that,
which was fascinating to me,
about the book.
>>DOSSEY: Well, I had
written a couple of books
about the role of
consciousness in health.
And so these were published
without too much indigestion
by my publisher.
But when I presented them
with the book on prayer,
they refused to publish it.
And the reasoning was that you
can't sell a book on prayer.
There's no connection between
prayer and healing and science.
The whole idea is crazy.
So I wound up overnight
without a publisher.
>>LISA: Because they
wouldn't publish it.
>>DOSSEY: No.
They thought it was
an idiotic theme,
the arguments were crazy.
They weren't interested
in the science,
even though the
science was there,
even randomized
controlled studies.
This was just off the table.
So I wound up finding a
blessed, open-minded publisher
to publish the book.
And they published it.
And as you mentioned--
thank you--
it wound up on the New
York Times Bestseller List.
>>LISA: Yes, and the rest
is history on that one.
So what is what you consider
the definition of spirituality
in medicine?
How does that translate?
>>DOSSEY: I think
a definition that
would go down pretty
easily for most people is
that spirituality is a sense of
being connected with something
greater than the
individual self.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DOSSEY: Whether that
transcendent being is something
people want to call God or
Goddess or Allah or the Divine
or whatever.
But it's different
from religion.
>>LISA: It's different.
OK.
>>DOSSEY: Religion tends to
be a codified system of belief
and behavior that people
engage in in a congregation.
They come together with
people of like-minded belief.
And I think people
can be spiritual
without being religious.
I think I know a
lot of people who
are religious who
don't seem to have
much spirituality about them.
>>LISA: It would be interesting
to see the trends on that,
how that is trending now.
I've spoken with
many, many guests that
have said the same thing,
that there is a drifting away,
especially with young
children, of teaching
them the organized religion
that they were raised with
and raising them with more of
a moralistic, spiritual concept
around the face of morality.
And I am the same way.
I do the same thing.
I have a young child.
And so we're raising
her with what
it means to be a good
person and also God.
And there's concepts
around then.
There's a lot of people
doing the same thing,
yet there's also a lot of people
in organized religion as well.
>>DOSSEY: Well, that's true.
And I think it's important
to say that people
can be religious and spiritual,
and spiritual and religious.
So we don't want to put
these things in a box
and say you can't be both.
A lot of people are both.
This is important, because if
you look at the studies looking
at people's intentions
to heal someone else,
it doesn't matter
what you call it.
>>LISA: That's
true.
>>DOSSEY: Whether
you use a language
that involves "thee" and "thou"
or whether you pray to God
or whether you don't
consider yourself
affiliated with a religion
at all, a lot of the studies
show that people
who are absolutely
unaffiliated with religion
can achieve success
in these healing studies.
So we come back again
and again to the idea
that no specific religion has
a monopoly on these healing
intentions or prayer.
>>LISA: So if no
specific religion
has the monopoly on
it, and spirituality
is an overarching theme
around it, the way that you
have quantified that this
actually affects people,
in your practice for example,
give me an example of,
in your practice,
how this had worked.
>>DOSSEY: Well, the first
example that comes to mind
is an experience I had
during my medical training
in internal medicine.
I had a patient in
the hospital who
was an elderly man who
was a heavy smoker.
He was in his 80s.
And he had metastatic
lung cancer.
There was nothing
to be done for this.
He opted to have no
therapy, which was smart,
because no therapy worked in
those days for this problem.
The only therapy he had, if
you want to call it a therapy,
is that the congregation
from his church
came and ringed his bedside
at all visiting hours
and prayed nonstop for this guy.
Well, at that time in my life,
I was not impressed by this.
He wanted to go home to die.
And so I discharged
him at his wish.
And a year later, he showed
back up at the hospital
with a bad case of the flu.
I did another
chest x-ray on him,
and it was perfectly clear.
This man recovered from
metastatic, lethal lung cancer,
and the only therapy that he
was exposed to was prayer.
This really got my attention.
>>LISA: As his doctor.
>>DOSSEY: As his physician.
I didn't know what
to do with this.
So I repressed it, you know,
things you can't figure out
and you get sort of
messed around about,
you just sort of deny them.
I'm good at denial.
>>LISA: Well, as
a physician, when
your world is about science,
I'm sure a lot of other doctors
are in that same-- they don't
know what to do with it.
It can't be quantified.
This was a spontaneous
remission, and dismiss it.
>>DOSSEY: Well, that's right.
That's what I did.
And years later, the thing
that really got my attention,
as I've already mentioned,
are the randomized controlled
studies on prayer
and healing that
began to be done in a serious
way in modern hospitals.
I mentioned one that was
done at San Francisco General
Hospital in the
Coronary Care Unit.
At that time, I had patients
in the Coronary Care Unit
at all times.
And so here's what I thought.
I thought, if there's
anything to this controlled,
double-blind study
showing that prayer seems
to work in coronary patients,
and I'm not doing it,
do I have a problem with that?
I mean, am I denying
my patients something
that might be helpful?
And I got really
concerned about that.
The way of resolving
that crisis for me
was to look at the
world's literature, trying
to find other studies
that had to do with this.
I thought I might uncover
two or three extra ones
that I hadn't heard about.
I came up with 130.
And 2/3 of them show that there
is a positive effect from this.
I began to think this
is the best kept secret
in modern medicine.
And so I began to adapt
prayer for all my patients.
And that's how the book
got published, by the way,
and written, looking at
the data, not just stories,
not just anecdotes,
but combining
the scientific research
with the stories.
And that's how "Healing
Words" came to be.
>>LISA: And did you pray at
the bedside of these patients?
>>DOSSEY: I invented my
own private prayer ritual.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DOSSEY: I would go into my
office early in the morning,
earlier than usual,
close my door,
and have my own private
prayer ritual that I invented.
>>LISA: Which was?
>>DOSSEY: Oh, well, you
really want to know?
>>LISA: I do.
Yes, yes.
>>DOSSEY: Well, over
the years, my patients
knew I was interested in
the anthropology of healing.
And so they had
given me as gifts
various shamanic rattles
and various herbal incenses
from around the world.
And so I concocted
my own ritual where
I would burn incense that
shamans and healers were using
around the world
and shake my rattles
and say my healing request
and prayers for my patients
that I would be seeing on
hospital rounds that morning
and who would be coming
to my office that day.
And I continued
this ritual until I
retired from the practice
of internal medicine.
>>LISA: That blows my mind.
What was it like when
you were in the office?
Dr. Dossey's in, and
here's the rattles
and-- and you got the-- [LAUGHS]
>>DOSSEY: Well, actually
I went in so early
that I was about the
only person there.
I was not likely
to be interrupted.
But I will tell you an
interesting experience
along those lines.
One morning I burned too
much incense in my ritual,
and the smoke alarm went off.
And I was paid a visit
by the fire inspector
of the hospital who wanted to
know what that funny smell was.
>>LISA: Oh, no. [LAUGHS] Well,
my father was a physician.
And I remember he
would go into rounds,
and he would sometimes
dread going into the rounds.
And it would take a lot of time.
But he would spend a lot of time
with his patients and so forth.
But never once do I think he
went in and burned sage and did
the shamanic ritual.
Did it work?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I am
convinced that it did.
I didn't make a public
to-do about this.
Because one never knows
precisely where your patients
are religiously or spiritually,
and because I was positive
that prayer could
work at a distance.
I felt pretty confident
doing this in solitude
in the privacy of my own office
on behalf of my patients.
>>LISA: So it must
have, in some way-- did
you want to quantify
it in some way?
Did you ever see the patients
that you prayed for more?
Because you read the studies.
>>DOSSEY: Well, I did.
You know, those studies
are done more easily
in academic environments where
one has a huge staff that
can be involved in
gathering data and so on.
It's very difficult
to do that just
in a single doctor's
private practice.
I knew most of the
people who were
doing the research,
however, by that time.
And I had great confidence
in their ability to do that.
>>LISA: It's amazing,
though, because now there
are so many more doctors
who are alternative.
I guess I can't even use
the word "alternative"--
integrative.
And this is definitely a
rising trend in medicine.
Dr. Andrew Weil says it's
the future of medicine.
I'm sure you do as well,
integrative medicine.
And that is what you
were doing 20 years ago.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
>>LISA: I recently read
that there are actually
more visits to
alternative practitioners
now than there are to
actual medical doctors.
>>DOSSEY: Well, that's
a valid statistic.
That's exactly right.
And I think this is one reason
that the medical schools have
come on board.
For one thing, it has to do
with the economics of medicine.
When more patients are going
to so-called alternative
practitioners than
conventional doctors,
that's a lot of money
going out the front door.
And so doctors have become
interested in this on economics
alone, in addition to the fact
that these things may actually
have benefit for patients.
>>LISA: Then why isn't
insurance covering it more?
>>DOSSEY: That's a
tremendous question.
And I think that it is
only a matter of time
until insurance companies
wake up to the fact
that these things have economic
payoff for the insurance
company.
One reason I say that is that
people who follow some sort
of spiritual or religious path
in their life live on average 7
to 13 years longer
than people who don't.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>DOSSEY: And here's the thing.
This is where the insurance
companies will be looking,
be paying attention.
In the process, people
have a lower incidence
of all the major diseases,
including heart disease
and cancer, if they
follow some sort
of spiritual or religious
path in their life.
>>LISA: Really?
>>DOSSEY: So the
insurance companies
have a lot to gain by paying
attention to this kind of data.
>>LISA: But it's been
around-- that data's
been around for 10
years almost now.
>>DOSSEY: Actually
longer than that.
>>LISA: Longer than that, yeah.
>>DOSSEY: It's been out there.
But old habits
are hard to break.
>>LISA: Well, when the
systems are ingrained.
>>DOSSEY: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Yeah, and
they're big systems, too.
Absolutely.
Well, so there is a link
between spirituality
and integrative health care
that you understand, yes.
And we have a slide about that.
Explain that, that link.
>>DOSSEY: Well, spirituality
and alternative health care
do go together.
And the question is why.
There are surveys
that show that people
who choose to go to
so-called alternative
or complementary or
integrative practitioners
have had some sort of change
in the way they see the world.
Many talk about a
transformational experience
about how they see things.
They see themselves integrated.
They see themselves part
of a larger pattern.
And people, after
having this kind
of awakening about how
they are in the world,
are looking for doctors
who represent or are
cordial to that way
of looking at things.
And most people who
have this point of view
see in alternative
therapists a point of view
that's more compatible
with the way
they see things and the way they
experience being in the world
than they see being represented
by conventional doctors who
use only or mainly drugs
and surgical procedures.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>DOSSEY: So people sort
of sort themselves out
with the kind of doctor
that they feel at home with,
is what it amounts to.
>>LISA: Right.
And usually the doctor has had
that same type of experience
where they've had a spiritual
awakening or some type
of awakening or something that
dawned on them that they need
to soften that or transition
that level of their practice.
I mean, that's why
"Healing Words" is now
used in how many of the medical
schools now as a textbook?
>>DOSSEY: Well, there
are dozens of them.
A fact I always come back to is
that when the book was written,
out of the 125 medical
schools in the country,
only three had any
formal coursework looking
at the connection between
spirituality and healing.
And now, since the
book has been out
and has been used here
and there, over 90
of the nation's
128 medical schools
now feature course work looking
at the role of spirituality
and affecting health care.
>>LISA: Spirituality
and alternative.
And so this has
been definitely--
there's a slide here that talks
about a survey of physicians.
And so now doctors are starting
to accept more this concept
of prayer in-- specifically
prayer and the concept
of spirituality as an
umbrella in medicine.
>>DOSSEY: I'm really
glad you bring this up,
because when I was going
through medical school,
I was taught that
good doctors don't
believe any of this stuff.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>DOSSEY: It's mechanical
stuff all the way.
It's drugs and
surgical procedures.
>>LISA: So it's the opposite.
>>DOSSEY: So this is
a myth that doctors
don't believe in a connection
between spirituality
and health.
The surveys show that
3/4 of physicians
believe in spiritual effects,
even including miracle cures.
2/3 of them pray
for their patients
as a group or
individually, thereabouts.
And so this whole idea that
doctors don't believe anything
about the role of
spirituality in healing
is just a myth that really
needs to be put to rest.
>>LISA: So it's definitely
above the 50% level.
This is well into many,
many of these physicians.
And if physicians
are watching this,
this helps them
identify with the fact
that there is--
it's not just them
who believes in these
types of things.
I know that there's a lot more
nutritional information now
in medical schools.
My father is a medical
doctor, and he has now
gone back to study nutrition,
because it wasn't there when
he studied it, and
originally because it's
more so about the
mind-body-spirit connection.
It's definitely all altogether.
So did you at the time--
what type of criticism
were you experiencing when
you had-- when you brought
this book out a long time
ago, when you launched it?
>>DOSSEY: Well, there
were a considerable number
of physicians who developed an
enormous amount of intellectual
indigestion--
>>LISA: That's funny.
>>DOSSEY: --over
this kind of thing.
But that was early on.
And I must say that
it is rare when
I talk to doctors
at medical schools
and hospitals for anyone
to object to any of this.
I had the opportunity to
talk to tens of thousands
of doctors in a year's
time about these issues.
Almost no one objects anymore.
And I think that the
reason is that it's
really tough to deny
the power of the data.
And most doctors may be
willing to say, well,
the data may be true,
but I just don't
feel good about doing
this with my patients.
That's their choice.
And I think that
should be honored.
But most physicians
have integrated this
into their practice
and the interaction
with patients to some degree.
>>LISA: I remember
you once telling me
that you used to speak at
the medical conventions,
and that when your
lecture would come up,
the room would be fairly empty.
And then you saw it
grow and grow and grow.
And this was the interest
being piqued by the doctors.
Do you remember that?
Do you remember telling me that?
>>DOSSEY: I do.
Actually, it's interesting
to talk about these issues
with groups of doctors, because
the same thing always happens.
After the talk is over
and people are filing out,
there are always a few doctors
who come up to the podium,
and they will say
things like, well, you
think what you talked
about is weird,
let me tell you what I've
seen with my patients.
And so the stories come forth.
And I collect those
and occasionally
use them in my own writing.
Can I give you one
that happened recently?
>>LISA: Yes, definitely.
>>DOSSEY: It had to do with a
talk I gave about premonitions.
And I revealed to the
doctors my own experiences.
And in the Q&A session, a
female internist stood up
and she said, well,
I get numbers.
I get numbers in my dreams.
She said, I see the specific
values of my patients' lab
tests before I even
order the tests.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
Wow.
>>DOSSEY: So this
is the sort of thing
that doctors can
come forward with,
and I think it's
quite interesting.
Because it shows this-- if
you give doctors a safe place
to talk about weird
experiences, whether prayer,
distant healing,
and so on, you may
be surprised what
they come up with.
I think most doctors
have a long laundry
list of these experiences
with their patients
that they're just reluctant
to talk about publicly.
But they will under
certain circumstances.
>>LISA: You told me about
another doctor friend of yours
who is an OB/GYN.
>>DOSSEY: Yes.
>>LISA: And he
believes-- how does he
use that power of premonition?
Which is actually another
one of Dr. Dossey's books.
>>DOSSEY: Well he has a
strange sensation in his chest
every time one of his
patients is about to deliver.
And this never fails.
And he has a
premonition about when
the baby's coming
that's connected
with a bodily symptom.
Now this seems really bizarre,
but this is in the literature.
This does take place.
And it's an indicator
that premonitions
are valid if they're associated
with a bodily symptom.
This proves to be so reliable
that the nurses on the OB/GYN
floor of the hospital where he
works tell each other, well,
if you're uncertain when she's
going to deliver her baby, just
call Dr. So-and-So up and ask
him how his chest is feeling.
>>LISA: So it
actually has proven
to be right that many times.
>>DOSSEY: So they use
this as a clinical sign
of when the woman's
going to deliver.
>>LISA: I mean, let's
go into that more.
So 59% of doctors pray for
their patients individually.
>>DOSSEY: Mhm.
>>LISA: 59%.
And this was a
survey that was done.
51% pray for
patients as a group.
So in a group setting, they
pay-- pray for their patients?
>>DOSSEY: They'll pray for
their patients collectively.
>>LISA: I see.
>>DOSSEY: They'll pray
for the best outcome
or for a specific thing
to happen as a group.
They don't single them out.
But they pray privately
for their patients
as a collective whole.
>>LISA: And then 42%
encourage patients
to pray for themselves.
>>DOSSEY: Yes, and they do it,
not just to give something--
give their patient
something to do,
but they do it because they
think prayer is likely to work.
Doctors are very
pragmatic people.
They use what works.
They'll generally throw the
kitchen sink at anything
if they think there's
a chance it might work.
So the reason over half of
doctors pray for their patients
or encourage them to pray for
themselves is because they
think there's good
data suggesting
that this can be effective.
>>LISA: Well, there's
zero side effects as well.
That's the beautiful
part about it.
>>DOSSEY: I'm glad
you brought that up.
Yes.
>>LISA: As opposed
to other things.
So there has, as
you would say, there
has been a re-spiritualization
of medicine in your experience.
>>DOSSEY: There's
no doubt about it.
I've already mentioned
that almost none
of the medical
schools 20 years ago
had anything to do with this.
Now the great majority do.
Doctors are openly acknowledging
that they make a place
in their life, in
their practice life,
for prayer and
healing intentions.
So there's no going back.
And the reason I
keep coming back to,
Lisa, is because of the data.
I mean, there's just no
getting around the facts.
>>LISA: Well, that
is some of the data
that I actually
want to talk about.
I want to get into this and
what some of the-- as we've
talked about it a lot,
and we've quoted it a lot,
but what are some of the
actual scientific studies?
We're actually going
to go through that
in just a little bit.
But I wanted to talk a
little more about as doctors
are watching you, and
as patients are watching
this right now, and
they're understanding
that there could be some more
permission for this to happen
in their lives, do
you see the practices
and do you see hospitals
responding to this?
Do you see hospitals
creating programs or systems
around prayer used in healing?
>>DOSSEY: Well, there
are many hospital systems
across the country who
go out of their way
to integrate this on
an inpatient basis.
And they-- the reason
they-- and the way
they usually go about it is
through hospital chaplains
and pastoral counselors.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: Many
institutions are still
very wary of making this
something that doctors do.
But doctors don't
have to do this.
People can pray for themselves.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: You can
encourage friends
and loved ones to pray for
you if you're a patient.
And one of the most
responsive groups
in the whole country to this
emerging body of information
has been hospital chaplains
and pastoral counselors.
>>LISA: Right, I'm sure.
>>DOSSEY: I have the
opportunity to talk
to groups of these at
their national meetings.
And they seem extraordinarily
grateful that science
has given them some ammunition
in the form of control studies
that when people pray,
they're not fooling themselves
into thinking this works.
There's actual information in
the form of data confirming it.
>>LISA: So let's talk
about some of that.
Some of the studies--
and this is as recent
as 2010-- around major
randomized controlled clinical
trials of distant
healings and so forth.
Can you tell us a
little bit about those?
>>DOSSEY: Well,
my favorite study
is one that was done by a
famous researcher in the imagery
and visualization field,
Dr. Jean Achterberg.
She was recruited to
the Big Island of Hawaii
by a funder who had
built this hospital.
And this guy was interested,
fantastically interested,
in healing.
So she recruited
11 native healers
from the Hawaii
healer community.
And she invited him them to
go out and select a patient
to work with, that they felt
really empathic and loving
and very close and caring with.
And so she did one
of these fancy what
are called fMRI studies, the
Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging study of the brain.
Here's how it worked.
The patient's head
or brain was being
scanned at the time the healer
was sending prayer or healing
intentions, whatever
they called it.
And these healing
intention periods
were interspersed with periods
when they didn't do anything.
And only during the period when
the healer was doing healing,
the brain of the subject
lit up in the fMRI scanner,
indicating increased
metabolic activity
only when the healer
was doing her thing.
And this happened in
10 of the 11 subjects.
This is an astonishing
study, really,
because I think it just
demolishes the idea that prayer
is just positive thinking or
placebo effects and so on.
The odds against a
chance explanation
of this phenomenon in that
study was less than one chance
in 10,000.
>>LISA: Wow
>>DOSSEY: So this is
the sort of precision
that's being brought to looking
at the effects of prayer
and healing.
>>LISA: I remember you told me
about at Duke University there
were a number of studies
were done on, well,
specifically on control groups
where patients were prayed for
and those that were
not prayed for.
Can you tell us about
some of those results?
>>DOSSEY: Well, the study was
done by Dr. Mitchell Krucoff
and in his team.
And in their initial
study, they found
that there was a major
decrease in side effects,
such as bleeding and
cardiac arrhythmias,
in patients who were undergoing
cardiac bypass surgery.
I must say, however, that
studies to replicate that
particular study
often have not worked.
The most famous study has been
done at Harvard Medical School
in 1,800 patients undergoing
cardiac bypass surgery.
It was an extremely
confusing study.
And I think one
reason it did not work
is because it
tried to use prayer
in a way in which it is
never used anywhere on Earth.
>>LISA: How?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I don't want
to be too complex about this,
but very briefly, one third
of these 1,800 patients
were told that they
would be given prayer,
and they were given prayer.
They were prayed for.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DOSSEY: A third were told
you might be prayed for
or you might not be.
And they were prayed for.
And a third were told, you
might get prayer, maybe not.
And they were not prayed for.
Now, you would think that
the group that would do best
if prayer works was this first
group who were guaranteed they
were going to get prayed for
and they were prayed for.
As it turned out, this
group did the worst of all.
They had the highest incidence
of side effects following
cardiac bypass surgery.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>DOSSEY: So what happened here?
My interpretation of
this is that it violated
what's called ecological
validity, which
means that it
tried to use prayer
unlike it's used in real life.
I'll give you an example.
If you went to your
mother's bedside tonight,
and she was scheduled to have
bypass surgery tomorrow, you
would not say,
mom, I know you're
going to have a big
operation tomorrow,
but I'm just not sure I'm
going to pray for you.
>>LISA: Oh, no.
>>DOSSEY: You would not do this.
>>LISA: Absolutely not.
>>DOSSEY: It would be inhumane.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>DOSSEY: But this is what
was done, essentially,
in 2/3 of these patients
in the Harvard study.
So you have to ask
yourself, well, maybe that
stirred up some emotions that
are not healthy in people.
And maybe the people who
weren't sure they were going--
they were gonna
get prayer or not
would have recruited extra
prayer from outside, from loved
ones and friends.
Or maybe they would double
down on their own self prayer.
So this study was absolutely
confused, in my opinion.
But it's had a terrible
effect, because a lot of people
say, well, Harvard
disproved that prayer works.
And I think this is a complete
misinterpretation of the facts.
>>LISA: Well, indeed
there are studies
that of course
show the opposite.
And there's many of them.
>>DOSSEY: Well, there
are many of them.
By my count, there are 22
major studies in humans.
At least half of these show
statistically significant
results.
If you enlarge that to look
at the effects of prayer
and healing intentions on
animals and plants and so,
there are over 200 of these
studies, most of which
are positive.
>>LISA: I want to actually
ask you about that.
The plants and the
animals and so forth.
There were studies
that I remember
being done on funguses,
on plant growth.
These are things that people
can do at home, which I love.
>>DOSSEY: You can
try this at home.
>>LISA: You can
I recommended you
try this at home.
Tell us a little
bit about those.
>>DOSSEY: Well as
a matter of fact,
these are my favorite studies,
which may sound surprising.
Why not do all these
studies on people?
That's what we're
concerned with.
Well, the reason is that if you
do a study on animals-- rats,
mice, plants, growth rates
of bacteria in test tubes
and that sort of thing--
and the study is positive,
you can't explain
it away by saying
it was just the
placebo response.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: Or it just happened
because of positive thinking.
As far as we know, bacteria
don't think positively.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: Right?
>>DOSSEY: So if you
get a positive study
in the creatures, you've
really got some big stuff here.
Because you can't
explain it away--
>>LISA: Something more valid.
>>DOSSEY: --by calling
it the placebo response.
It doesn't work.
>>LISA: So what
were the studies?
Can you tell us a little
bit about-- I mean,
just a couple of them,.
>>DOSSEY: Well, there was one
study looking at the healing
rates of surgical
wounds in mice.
And I don't justify--
>>LISA: Animals testing, yeah.
>>DOSSEY: --animal testing.
But this is just part of
the history of this field.
And those animals that were
prayed for healed up faster.
And you can measure the
healing rate of surgical wounds
very precisely.
And so there was
a treatment group
that was not prayed
for increased healing
and versus the one that was.
And as in most of these
studies, the group that got
prayed for healed up
quicker than the group that
did not receive healing prayer.
The bacteria are interesting.
So it shows that there's a
huge variety of living things,
living organisms, that
respond to prayer.
When you pray for
an increased growth
rate in the bacteria in these
test tubes and not these,
these grow faster,
statistically speaking,
in the majority of studies.
And so I love this.
Because it says this
is a general principle
throughout nature of response
to healing intentions in prayer.
>>LISA: That is amazing.
No, that's really interesting.
Have you ever tried this at
home with yourself, with plants,
and I mean you probably have a--
>>DOSSEY: Oh, I pray for
my plants all the time.
>>LISA: --a
greenhouse, don't you?
You must.
>>DOSSEY: Yeah, I'm an obsessive
pray-er for my-- all the living
things around my house.
>>LISA: I can imagine.
>>DOSSEY: Actually, I've had
some interesting experiences
when I sometimes
pray for animals.
Recently coyotes had begun
to come outside my window
when I'm doing this.
And they look in and
fix me with their gaze
while I'm engaged in
meditation and prayer
for living things around
the house, my plants,
the birds at the feeders,
and all this kind of thing.
It's as if they
sense it and know it.
>>LISA: Now in the
studies that were
done-- that's a great thing
to try at home, by the way.
In the studies that were
done around the plants,
can you us a little
about the statistics that
were done with some growing more
than others, the prayed for,
not prayed for?
>>DOSSEY: Well, these
are very easy to do.
And just to speak generally,
the plants that are prayed for,
generally the seeds
germinate faster
than the un-prayed-for seeds.
The seedlings after
they germinate
grow faster than those
that are not prayed for.
I actually have
several children who
have done science projects
in the eighth grade who
have done these germination
experiments and the seedling
experiments.
It's interesting.
What these kids do is
to plant their seeds
and put a string down the middle
and just pray for the seeds
on this side of the string
and not the other ones.
And then they just
take serial pictures.
And they send me the pictures.
And almost invariably,
it's the prayed-for seeds
that germinate faster.
One little girl said that she
wasn't sure about this prayer
stuff, so in her experiment,
she recruited a nun
to pray along with her.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] She
didn't want to do it.
>>DOSSEY: She wanted
to make that she got--
>>LISA: It was done right.
>>DOSSEY: She got plenty
of good, solid prayer
in her experiment.
>>LISA: That's a great idea.
I mean, you don't have to
be in eighth grade science
to do that.
You can definitely
do that at home.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
>>LISA: So take a
plant and put it
in your window and pray
for, and another one
and let the sun do its work,
and see which one grows.
No, that's a great idea.
I'm personally blown away
by the statistics around it
and the science that
has been done around it.
And I think there's a lot
to be gained and to learn.
Thank you, though,
for sharing that,
because it's the science
that I'm looking for.
We're going to do
a lot more of this.
We're going to share a lot more
of these scientific studies.
We're going to
take a quick break,
but we're going to learn
about what you did.
There's a Hawaiian
study that was done.
There's all sorts
of different things.
But for me, the one that
applied to me the most
was about the funguses
and the plants.
Because as you said,
those are definitely
double blind studies.
They are control-- they can't
be subject to the-- your int--
well, it can't be subject
to their intentions.
>>DOSSEY: That's the
message there, yeah.
>>LISA: All right.
We're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back,
we're going to talk
about more of the studies.
Because I just
don't think you can
talk about this enough
around the science
and the studies that are
done around the effectiveness
of prayer and healing.
We'll be right back.
Welcome back.
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
And my guest is
Dr. Larry Dossey,
who's really
responsible for bridging
that gap between
science and spirituality
in the medical community.
He really changed the face
of medicine by the studies
that he's brought about on
the effectiveness of prayer
and healing.
He's also known as the "prayer
pioneer," affectionately known
as the "prayer pioneer."
So we were talking before
the break about studies
around how prayer is
completely effective in healing
plants, animals, funguses,
people-- double blind,
randomized studies
that have been done,
clinical studies
that have been done
over the past several decades.
And you've really been
responsible in bringing
this about.
How about the idea
of remote healing?
Can that be used to help someone
if they're in the hospital
and you pray for them when
you're in a different location?
>>DOSSEY: Well, most
of these studies
actually have
involved healers who
were not on site at the bedside.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DOSSEY: And so
these, by and large,
are studies in remote healing.
You know, the reason that
physicians and researchers
do the remote thing is that if
you're standing at the bedside,
the patient knows you're there,
you know, and so this stirs up
all sorts of positive thinking.
And the skeptics
can say, well, it
wasn't the prayer
that did anything.
The person knew you
were praying for them,
and they just wanted
to help it along,
and so nothing is happening
as far as the prayer.
But if you have a praying
individual off 50,
100 miles away,
and the stuff works
when the individual doesn't
even know it's happening,
then you've really
got something there.
>>LISA: It's so funny.
There is such a need
for the skeptics.
There really is a
need for the skeptics.
I look at this as something
to scientifically quantify
something that I instinctively
already know and have
used and tried all of my life.
And anyone who's ever prayed
to God knows that it works.
But this is great.
No, it's really great to
validate this within science.
And that's why I so
appreciate what you've done.
But you have used this all
your life, haven't you?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I have.
See, I grew up in an
intensely religious community
in central Texas.
It wasn't just the Bible Belt.
We called it the Buckle
of the Bible Belt.
Everybody just accepted that
this was the way it was.
But that didn't stick on me.
I mean, I went away to
university and medical school,
and I became a self-respecting
agnostic atheist
and bought into the idea
of complete materialistic
approaches to healing.
And I was told that no
good doctor believed
in any of this California
woo-woo healing intention
stuff.
And so I bought that
for several years
until I began to regrow
my own spiritual roots
and actually just had a
violent encounter in 1988 when
the first randomized
controlled study of prayer that
was really high
quality was published.
And it really got my attention.
And it wasn't a comfortable
experience for me, either.
>>LISA: It doesn't
seem like it would.
You were angry about it?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I thought,
who in their right mind
would study prayer
like you would
a new medication,
control group that
didn't get the therapy and
a treatment group that did?
And I was really
troubled by that.
>>LISA: Why?
>>DOSSEY: Well,
because I thought
I'd dealt with that in my
spiritual religious past
and had put that to bed.
And here is this Dr. Randolph
Byrd at San Francisco General
Hospital who has come forward
to do this audacious study
with these preposterous findings
that this stuff appeared
to work.
And I was uncomfortable
with it because I
didn't have any
inclination to use this.
I wouldn't have
prayed for my patients
on a bet at that
time in my life.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>DOSSEY: But you know,
you confront these things,
and you have to ask, well, if
the stuff works and I'm not
doing it, do I have
an ethical issue?
Should I be using something
that has been shown to work?
It would be like saying,
well, I just kind of
have an idea that I don't
want to use penicillin.
And there are all these
other studies out there
that show that you better
use it in certain infections.
And this was sort of my-- like
my confrontation with prayer.
Should I be using it?
>>LISA: And so you came full
circle with this from the Bible
Belt, the buckle,
to the agnostic--
>>DOSSEY: Right.
>>LISA: --to now being the
advocate of bringing prayer
back in and its effectiveness
from a scientific founding
level into the
medical community.
Awesome.
That's why you're here.
That's why you have
these amazing--
you've made such an impact.
That's beautiful.
>>DOSSEY: Well, we don't
always know the twists
and turns in our careers, do we?
>>LISA: But look back.
It's great.
So, about the
remote viewing, how
do they quantify that
that is absolutely valid?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I think
people have an ability
to acquire information
from the world out there.
This is called remote
viewing in some circles.
I think that this gets to be
very interesting in medicine
because people can know
things at a distance
without any sensory assistance.
And here's where it actually
begins to get interesting.
People can know things
about their own body
without any sort of mechanical
intervention at all.
Let me give you an example
about how this operates.
A friend of mine had a
patient who came to him.
He was a family physician.
And this woman said,
I have breast cancer,
and it's right here.
And she took an index finger
and pointed to a specific point
in her breast and said,
this is where my cancer is.
And so he did an exam.
It was completely normal.
They even did a mammogram,
and it was totally normal.
And she said, I don't care.
I know it's here.
And I want-- I demand
a breast biopsy.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>DOSSEY: So she wouldn't
let him off the hook.
And so he phoned
up a friend of his
who was a cancer breast surgeon.
And he said, look, please
biopsy this woman's breast.
And he said, there's
nothing to biopsy.
Where would I biopsy?
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>DOSSEY: And so the doctor
said, well, I don't know.
Just biopsy where she points.
So it sounds like a comedy,
but the doctor did the biopsy,
and he, a couple
days later, phoned
the referring first doctor,
and he said, it's cancer.
This is the most microscopic
cancer I have seen in years.
How did you find it?
It wouldn't have shown
up on a mammogram
or you couldn't feel it.
How did you know?
And this doctor, to his credit,
said, well, I didn't find it.
She did.
And she saw it in a dream.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>DOSSEY: So this is
where consciousness
comes to be really important,
even in life and death
issues in medicine,
not just intentionality
and distant healing, not
just in remote viewing,
but the ability of
ourselves to use our minds
in a way that has
been denied possible
in the history of Western
scientific medicine.
>>LISA: Right, but if
somebody came in that says,
I had a dream, they would
think that person's crazy,
that they're a hypochondriac,
that they're intentionally
willing themselves to get
cancer to avoid an issue.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
>>LISA: I mean,
you have dived deep
into this concept
of premonitions.
You wrote an entire
book about this,
about how people use the power
premonitions to diagnose,
to heal, to circumvent
events that have happened.
It's a very strong body
of work that you've
once again
scientifically qualified.
>>DOSSEY: Well, I didn't do it
willingly, Lisa, I must say.
I mean, I got into this
area kicking and screaming.
>>LISA: Again?
>>DOSSEY: Again.
Yes, I did not go willingly.
But actually, like with
the prayer encounters,
I had some encounters
with premonitions
that I could not back away from.
The very first year I
was in medical practice
in internal medicine, I had a
series of dream premonitions
which absolutely shook me up.
And I knew the world was not
supposed to work like this.
And it took me a long time
to come to terms with that.
>>LISA: What were those?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I dreamt that
the three-year-old son of one
of my cardiology colleagues
was on an examining table.
And this was a
really weird dream.
I hardly knew this child.
And there was some
technician trying
to do a test on his head.
And the mother was
standing at the bedside,
and this kid went crazy,
fighting the technician,
screaming, crying.
And finally the technician just
says, I quit, and walks away.
And that was the dream.
And interestingly, this
was-- I swear, at the time,
this seemed like the most
vivid dream I've ever
had in my life, none of
which made any sense.
So I get up the next morning,
I go make hospital rounds.
And I'm sitting with the
father, the cardiologist,
of this young kid at
lunch when the wife walks
in holding this baby, this
child, and his hair is wet
and he's crying.
And she describes to
her husband my dream.
They had just come
from the EEG laboratory
where they tried to
do a brainwave test.
The child just went berserk.
The mother could
not calm the child.
Finally the technician
just gave up.
So she describes what I
dreamed the night before.
And I just didn't know
what to do with this.
I mean, I was sort of an
existential mini crisis.
>>LISA: Did you say?
>>DOSSEY: Well, what I did--
she left with the little boy.
And I discussed this
with the father.
And I said, could I
have known about what
events were going
to play out today?
He said, what?
Of course not.
And so he-- I told him my dream,
and he became very anxious,
agitated, refused to
talk about it ever.
So he was absolutely
threatened that this experience
could occur.
I was uncomfortable, too.
>>LISA: Right, being two
physicians talking about it.
>>DOSSEY: Right, so we knew
the world couldn't do this.
Things don't behave like this.
So I mentioned that
I'm a great denier.
So I tried to deny this one.
Actually, that didn't
work very well.
Because patients began
to describe to me
their own premonitions.
>>LISA: Unsolicited.
>>DOSSEY: Unsolicited.
And then nurses
began to get wind
that Dossey's interested
in this stuff.
So they began to share
their experiences with me.
And so one thing led
to another, and--
>>LISA: And that's how
you got into that book.
It's all combined, though.
I mean, basically everything
that you talk about
is about human consciousness.
>>DOSSEY: It's about how
consciousness manifests
in the world in
these strange ways
that we've been
really nervous about.
We haven't wanted to talk
about these things publicly.
But there's no going back.
You can't put this
genie back in the bottle
for the overwhelming reason
of the scientific studies.
>>LISA: So now we come to
this time and day in history
where consciousness
is actually discovered
to be valid scientifically.
There's a whole study about
this, about how consciousness
is valid in the
scientific community.
>>DOSSEY: Well, actually
there are some enterprising,
courageous academicians
in many fields,
including mathematics and
cognitive science and physics,
who are standing
up for what they're
calling the fundamental
nature of consciousness.
I mean, this is a new ball game.
Because 20 and 30
and 40 years ago,
indeed during the 20th
century, the going idea
is that the brain makes
consciousness in ways nobody
understands, but consciousness
is just-- it just
emanates from the brain
in some strange way.
Sort of like the
liver makes bile.
The brain somehow
makes consciousness.
This has never been proved.
It's never been
directly observed.
There's no proof for it.
But that's the going mythology.
And so these studies
say otherwise.
They say that consciousness
can do things in the world
that brains can't do.
Brains stay put in the
cranium, in the skull.
Consciousness can acquire
information at a distance.
For example, in
remote healing, it
can insert information at
a distance into the world.
You can't explain this by
just equating consciousness
with the brain.
Taking these leads,
many academicians
from these various
fields now are
saying that consciousness
is independent of the brain.
It may work through the brain.
There's no debate about that.
But you can't understand
how consciousness operates
in our lives by just saying
it's a function of the neurons.
It just doesn't work.
>>LISA: No longer.
There's so much not only
curiosity about this,
the military's
using this in terms
of a valid way of discovering
where certain people are.
And yeah, it's very, very
well researched at this point.
And it's used currently
in our society now.
>>DOSSEY: Oh, absolutely.
I think it's used
undercover in medicine, too.
>>LISA: Is it?
>>DOSSEY: I know skeptics
who just won't go there
in terms of what you
and I have been talking
about who nonetheless,
in my opinion,
use these extraordinary
ways of knowing
without even thinking about it.
I'll just give you one example.
I had a couple of
professors in medical school
who were able to make diagnoses
in ways they couldn't even
explain.
After they were able to
make a complex diagnosis,
on one occasion, I went up
to one of them and I said,
how did you get
from A to B to C?
How did you make this diagnosis?
And he had no explanation.
He said, oh, Larry,
it's just experience.
That was really helpful.
I mean, there's no explanation.
So what I think a lot of these
really skilled diagnosticians
do is to use ways of knowing
that are not rational,
that you can't figure out in
terms of intellectual analysis.
And they just sort of
accept it as just part
of their equipment.
>>LISA: But they have been
scientifically quantified.
And there have
been studies on it.
So it does-- you
can validate it.
>>DOSSEY: Well, you can.
Interestingly,
though, some people
become so self-identified
with this totally material way
of looking at things
that they don't
want to look at the studies.
I have a perverse habit
of collecting comments
from skeptics that
illustrate their refusal
to look at the data.
My favorite one is this.
One guy said, this
is the sort of thing
I wouldn't believe
even if it were true.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] That's good.
You told me a study
about nurses--
I mean, a story
about nurses that
went to go get a
therapeutic touch class.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
My wife is a nurse.
And she was involved in
this and told me this story.
This happened at a
huge Dallas hospital.
Many nurses are very
open to these ways
of knowing and distant
healing and so on.
And so the nurse community at
the hospital sort of banded
together and went
off one weekend
to take the course in
healing touch or Reiki.
I can't remember exactly
what the technique was.
But the director of
nursing was infuriated.
>>LISA: That they
took this course.
>>DOSSEY: That they went
off and took the course
in distant healing.
And so when the nurses came
back to work Monday morning,
the director of nursing
had made this huge sign
and posted in the nursing
department which said,
"There will be no healing
in this hospital."
>>LISA: Oh, can you
imagine seeing that?
You walk in, there
will be no healing.
That's what the hospital does.
That's what you're there to
do is to heal, to get better.
That's interesting.
>>DOSSEY: A related
instant illustrating
the obstreperous nature
of some people in medicine
toward this sort
of stuff, my wife,
who is a pioneer in nursing
for this sort of thing,
Barbara-- has written many
books about this-- was invited
to give a lecture to a major
hospital in another city.
But when the people who
invited her discovered
that she was going to
talk about healing,
wrote her a
dis-invitation, saying,
well, we've thought this over.
We think we can't
invite you just yet.
But we plan to re-invite you
when we get into healing.
So Barbara, my wife, said, I
wonder what they're into now.
>>LISA: Yeah, what is
it that they're doing?
>>DOSSEY: What is
it that they're
doing now if not healing?
>>LISA: So what is the
bottom line of all of this?
How can we use this
in our practical life?
>>DOSSEY: Yeah.
Well I think this
is highly practical.
We've talked about
people knowing and doing
something about diseases,
incipient diseases,
before they show up,
like the breast biopsy
that the woman just
knew was there.
And also the remote
healing studies.
This is practical stuff.
I think that there's
a point, however,
where this gets
beyond being just
another tool in our black
bag of medical opportunities.
And I think it has to do with
the nature of consciousness.
What these studies
show us is that there
is some aspect of
who we are that
can operate outside
the here and now.
We can operate, we
can insert information
at a distance, remote healing.
We can know things
before they happen.
These are the premonitions
that we've touched on.
And so there's some
aspect of consciousness
that is just not confined
to the physical body.
I call this non-local
behaviors of consciousness.
I call it the non-local mind.
Non-local is a term that's
barred from physics,
but it essentially
means infinitude.
If something's non-local, it's
infinite in space and time.
Now, viewers can go
read about non-locality,
but what you will
determine in a heartbeat is
that if something's non-local,
it's eternal and immortal.
It's infinite in time.
If something's infinite in
time, it means it lasts forever.
So what these studies
do is to point
like an arrow toward an
infinite, immortal, eternal
aspect of consciousness.
I think this is a pretty
nice realization, frankly.
>>LISA: It gets into--
where my mind is
going is if that is
true, then what can you
create beyond that?
How can you, of course,
intentionally create healing
in yourself, intentionally
create healing in others,
intentionally create
almost anything, as long
as it's ecological?
Can it be used for
the reverse effects?
Can people create ill will
with this intentionality,
this consciousness?
>>DOSSEY: Well that's
a rational question.
And it's a question that
always occurs to people.
If I can use my consciousness
in positive ways,
can I use it in negative
ways, for example
to harm people and so on?
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: There are
no studies in humans
to look at this possibility
of harming other people.
Because those kind of
studies are illegal.
You cannot do a scientific study
whose end result is to harm.
But what you can do is to test
this possibility on non-humans.
And people have been able to
work this both ways in animals
and plants and
microbes and so on.
For example, there are
a series of studies
show that people can perk up
the growth rates positively
in this group of bacteria
and not the control group.
And they can be given different
instructions, which say,
I don't want you to
make them grow quicker.
I want you to harm them,
make them grow slower
than the controls.
>>LISA: The bad bacterias.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
And so people can
operate this either way.
This clearly, it
seems to me, shows
that people can cause
living organisms
to flourish or to be harmed.
This is what the data show.
And so you wonder, why
do we have this ability
to help and harm?
And I think that
there's a solid reason.
And if you think about when
people have an infection.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: Let's say
pneumococcal pneumonia,
which kills tens of thousands
of elderly people every year.
If you were praying
for your grandmother
to get well from
penumococcal pneumonia,
you would not be praying for
those bacteria to flourish.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: Right?
You would want to harm them.
You probably want
even to kill them.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: I mean, that's
why we give antibiotics.
We want to kill
those suckers, right?
And so there are
certain situations
where it might come in really
handy to be able to harm
certain living things,
like pathogenic bacteria.
And if you think about
using your consciousness
to harm cells, well if
somebody has cancer,
you probably really want
to kill those cancer cells.
So it may be--
>>LISA: That's what
the chemotherapy does.
Yes, yes.
>>DOSSEY: That's exactly right.
So there are
situations where you
can imagine it would
be a good thing
to be able to harm living
things, pathogenic bacteria,
cancer cells among them.
>>LISA: And so this-- so
I mean, we're acting as if
and we're talking as
if this really does
work, this whole field
of, as it's been called,
quantum entanglement really,
absolutely does work.
>>DOSSEY: Well quantum
entanglement has emerged--
it's one of the
most popular ideas
about how this
might be understood.
And it goes back to
observations about 30 years
ago in what are called quantum
physics experiments where you
take two particles that are
in contact, separate them,
even to the opposite
ends of the universe,
and when you change one,
the other changes instantly
and to the same degree.
How is this possible?
There's no contact.
It happens instantly.
There's no time for a signal
to go from one to the other.
So they behave as if
they are a single entity,
even though they're apart.
>>LISA: Now, I
remember-- the story
you told me was
about somebody was
watching images in a monitor.
And they were being
monitored in the next room.
Can you tell me a little
bit about the neurons that
were monitored as a
reaction of the images?
>>DOSSEY: Right.
What this study actually did
was to take human brain cells,
neurons, and grow them
in a cell culture dish.
And so what you have
here are brain cells,
brain tissue, over
here and over here.
And they're put in
a lead-lined box
so that there's
no communication.
They're shielded
from each other.
And what happens is that
if you shine a laser
beam on one group of them,
they change, and instantly
the other distant,
shielded neurons
change to the same degree.
So somehow they're communicating
even though they can't.
They're shielded from all
electromagnetic signals.
They have no known connections
between each other.
But they behave as if
they're still united.
Now this is entanglement
at the cellular level.
We're not talking
photons or electrons.
We're talking
human brain tissue.
>>LISA: And the same thing was
done if the brain tissue was
put into another room,
another building.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
>>LISA: Another state.
>>DOSSEY: And here's where this
becomes really interesting.
You can take people
now, having demonstrated
that brain tissue can be
connected at a distance,
and you can separate the people.
And you can hook them
both up to an EEG machine
or an fMRI, imaging
fancy piece of equipment.
And you can shine a light
in the eyes of one person,
making the EEG jump, and
instantly the other EEG
registers the same change,
even though there's
no connection between
these people at all.
>>LISA: No communication
that you're
going to get a light
shined in-- nothing.
>>DOSSEY: No, no, no.
>>LISA: Nothing.
>>DOSSEY: And somehow
there's a connection.
This defies everything we know
about conventional science.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>DOSSEY: But you know what is
interesting about the people
who do demonstrate the
changes at a distance
as if they're
connected, they usually
are very empathic
with each other.
They usually are people
who know each other
and have a loving
heart connection.
And this has been worked
out in many studies that
look at the way the
connection may be mediated.
This really gets back
to the healing work,
because all of the healers
whom I have interviewed
and whom I have asked,
how do you do this?
What makes this work?
If you take it away,
and it won't work,
what would that thing be?
And they all say love.
They say caring.
You've got to have empathy.
Some will use a term like,
well, you've just got to care.
You've just got to
feel it in your heart.
>>LISA: But some
of these healers
don't even know the subjects
that they're healing.
So they don't have
a relationship.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
But if they have a
relationship, the effect
seems to be even
more pronounced.
>>LISA: Even stronger.
Has it ever been
effective on people
that don't have
the relationship?
>>DOSSEY: Oh, yes.
It has.
>>LISA: It has?
>>DOSSEY: Healing
has been demonstrated
in these double-blind studies
when healers who don't even
know the recipient are involved.
>>LISA: Wow.
And it's effective?
>>DOSSEY: It is.
But the thing is, I think that
almost all of these studies
would be even more effective if
they use healers who actually
knew who they were praying for.
You see, in real life, we
say something like, well,
we pray for our
loved ones, right?
I mean, you hear people
say this all the time.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>DOSSEY: And there's a
lot of wisdom in that.
You love them.
That means you know
them, almost always.
You know who you're praying for.
And also you pray
unconditionally for them.
You don't hold out
prayer as a maybe.
I think I might pray for
you, but I'm not sure.
I mean, this is a
double-blind experiment.
>>LISA: I'm only going
to pray a little bit.
Or I don't want you
to heal completely.
Yeah.
There's no judgement in it.
>>DOSSEY: But you get
your heart into it.
And so that's why I think some
of the spontaneous healings
that we see in real
life, where people pray
for another person and
the disease goes away,
I think that's where you see
the power of prayer jacked up
to a really high level.
>>LISA: That's enormous.
I mean, then we're going
to talk a little bit
about the studies on
spontaneous remissions.
But I'm thinking about
this in a practical sense
and in a humanitarian sense.
I mean, when we pray for
people who are hungry,
when you pray for people
that are starving,
that are destitute, that prayer
in large numbers of people,
really is effective.
That's what we're
learning today.
>>DOSSEY: Well, that's
what we're learning.
And we're not fooling ourselves.
One thing that we get
out of these experiments
is proof that when we
assume that my thoughts
and my compassionate intentions
make a difference out there
in the world,
that's not fantasy.
That's the ultimate
value of these studies.
They show that we're
not fooling ourselves
when we talk about
the ability of people
to positively influence
others at a distance.
>>LISA: But why is there,
then, still starvation
and child prostitution
and destitution?
>>DOSSEY: If I were
able answer that,
I think I'd be
awarded a Nobel Prize.
These are the great things
that we struggle with.
We can always say that if we
were not praying and intending
a better situation
through prayers
or healing intentions
or whatever,
that situations would be worse.
I know that's not a very
satisfactory answer.
But I think that's one
of those questions that--
>>LISA: Is not scientifically
quantifiable at this point.
>>DOSSEY: I don't know
how to approach that.
>>LISA: Right.
But what we can approach is the
ideas of spontaneous remission
and how this has worked.
Now, we mentioned there's
some studies on this,
on spontaneous remission
and how many cases
it actually worked on and
how many it didn't work on.
>>DOSSEY: This is
an interesting area,
because most physicians
are taught, as I was,
that spontaneous
remissions are really rare.
I was told that you'll probably
go through your entire career
without ever seeing
one of these things.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: I think that's
just flat out wrong.
Several years ago, Carol
Hirshberg and Brenna Regan
did a literature search
from around the world
in many languages and dozens
of scientific journals
and came up with
over 3,000 cases that
have been published in the
medical literature where
the disease just absolutely went
away, either with no therapy
or with such piddly
therapy that you couldn't
attribute the cure
to the therapy.
And so this flies in
the face of the idea
that these things
are really rare.
>>LISA: And it also
said that they're
done in different languages,
20 different languages.
>>DOSSEY: Which means
that these things
are seen all over the world.
And bear this in mind--
these things are not
usually reported, so
they're under-reported.
Doctors don't want
to write them up.
They just ignore them.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>DOSSEY: So they found
3,000 of these studies.
How many more actually
happened, would we
imagine, since they're
not usually reported?
>>LISA: Of course.
I mean, that could
absolutely double.
There's a specific
study that was
done about Rita Klaus, that one?
>>DOSSEY: Right.
Well, Rita Klaus is my
favorite example of one
of these spontaneous
healings that just happens.
Her history is
absolutely fascinating.
She was extremely
religious as a girl.
And she received permission
to go into a convent
to become a nun earlier than
the rules ordinarily allowed.
But something
horrible happened soon
after she went to the convent.
She developed her first
symptoms of multiple sclerosis.
And this proved to
be one of the worst
cases of multiple
sclerosis you can imagine.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>DOSSEY: She couldn't walk.
She wound up in a wheelchair.
She could not attend to
her duties in the convent,
so she was given
dispensation from her vows
and allowed to leave.
She had to make a living, so she
went back and became a biology
teacher in high school.
And she lost her faith.
She became extremely furious,
in particular, at faith healers.
And she wanted nothing to do
with any of this spirituality
and healing business.
And there remained a little
interest in healing, however,
because she went to
Medjugorge, in Yugoslavia
at the time, where a lot of
miracles have been reported.
But she didn't get one.
She came back with no effect,
positive benefit, at all.
And so she doesn't
know what to do.
And at her wits end,
she can't stand up
without locked iron braces.
And so-- and her
doctors had predicted
that she-- this was such
a bad case it would soon
affect her mental
abilities and so on.
So one night she has a dream.
And in the dream, she sees the
Virgin Mary appear before her,
and Mary says, Rita, why don't
you just ask for a healing?
So in her dream, Rita
just asks for healing.
Actually, she had
never done this before.
So she wakes up.
The next day she's
teaching biology
in her wheelchair in
the high school class,
and she looks down and
she sees her toes moving.
And she says, well,
it's just muscle spasm.
I've had this before.
And interestingly,
her kneecaps, which
were on the outside of her knees
because the doctors had severed
the tendons to give her a little
more movement-- the kneecaps
have migrated back into
their normal position.
This is essentially impossible.
>>LISA: Yeah, yeah.
>>DOSSEY: So what's
going on here?
And she says, I want
you to take me home.
Somebody drives her home,
helps her get her wheelchair
into the living room.
So she's sitting
there, and she says,
I'm going to put
this to the test.
She says, if something
is really happening here,
I can get out of this
wheelchair and run up
these 13 steps to
the second floor.
>>LISA: That was more of a test.
>>DOSSEY: This is
idiotic, really.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>DOSSEY: And she does.
>>LISA: She did it?
>>DOSSEY: She did.
She ran back down the stairs.
She ran out the front
door of her house,
jumped over a little creek,
fell down and got muddy.
And she comes back
into the living room
and picks up the phone
and calls her priest.
And this poor man is-- actually,
he's kind of horrified by this.
He hadn't seen this before.
And says, Rita, lie
down, take an aspirin,
and call your doctor.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>DOSSEY: So he didn't
want anything to do with--
>>LISA: He didn't
believe it, either.
>>DOSSEY: He didn't
believe any of this stuff.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>DOSSEY: So she calls her
best friend, who comes over.
They enjoyed a
good cry together.
So in a couple days, her
husband takes her back
to the big hospital.
And she sees all of her
sub-specialists, the urologist,
the orthopedist, the
neurologists, and so on.
And some of them
don't believe it.
One of her doctors accused her
of having an identical twin
and playing a
practical joke on them.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
Because it was that shocking.
>>DOSSEY: Yes.
It was that shocking.
But one of her doctors
did a neurological exam,
and it was normal.
Even the tendon
reflexes were normal.
This should not
have been possible.
Because the surgeons had
severed the tendons, right?
But now they're normal.
As a matter of fact, her
entire neurological examination
was normal.
>>LISA: This is one of
the most extreme cases
I've ever heard of.
>>DOSSEY: I think
it takes the cake.
And I love this because
it's all written down.
>>LISA: It's documented.
>>DOSSEY: A couple
of my friends who
wrote a book about this actually
went to look at her hospital
charts and the progress
notes and the whole thing.
So this is well recorded
and well documented.
But what do you do with that?
I mean, this is not
possible from the standpoint
of conventional medicine.
>>LISA: Is it just
this one person?
Right, can it just happen
to her and not to me?
But there's
statistics around this
as well that you've accumulated
about how many people believe
here that Marc Ian
Barasch did and Hirschberg
did as well about
spontaneous remissions
and how many people
actually have
received-- have
experienced them.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
This the team--
Hirshberg was one
of the team that found those
3,000 studies worldwide.
And she and Marc Barasch
interviewed around 60 people
in the United States they
could get their-- get contact
with who had actually
been written up
in the medical literature.
So they went to
these people and did
something that's never
been done before.
They said, why did you get well?
See, when these
cases are reported
in the medical literature,
you never get this.
They never ask the person why
they thought they got well.
But they did it, and you can
see that the reasons that people
give for getting well are
all over the ballpark.
I mean, it's like anything
has been attributed to work.
>>LISA: Look at that.
The highest percentage,
though, is positive belief,
which I find very interesting.
>>DOSSEY: Right.
And also prayer is right up
there close with 68% or 69%.
>>LISA: I don't see difference
that much in positive belief
and prayer, but
apparently there is?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I think
it's all blended together.
>>LISA: Me, too.
>>DOSSEY: And I'm almost
certain the people
who pray with the expectation
of getting better-- that's
positive belief if you ask me.
>>LISA: Is there a
certain way of praying?
Is there a certain way
that you recommend to pray
or that you have studied that
works better than other ways?
>>DOSSEY: I've looked at
that pretty carefully.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>DOSSEY: And
people forever have
been looking for the
right way to pray, right?
What's the formula?
>>LISA: Right.
What do I do?
>>DOSSEY: That's
what I want to do.
That's right.
There isn't one.
If you ask people
who are good at this,
the really solid healers who
perform well in the studies,
they're all over the ballpark.
Some use "thee" and "thou,"
and some use vivid imagery.
Some try to get rid of imagery.
As we've already mentioned, some
are religious, some are not.
I know even agnostics who
use healing intentions,
but they don't want it
mixed up with religion.
>>LISA: So you can
use visualization.
You can use meditation.
>>DOSSEY: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Well, it has been done.
>>DOSSEY: Well,
it has been done.
And that's one of the strategies
that's been looked at.
I must say that early on in
the history of these peer
experiments, people tested
two ways of praying.
One is where people pray for
something really specific,
make the cancer go away,
heal the heart attack,
versus people who used an
open-ended way of praying
in which they said, well,
may thy will be done,
or may the best thing happen,
without spelling it out.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DOSSEY: There's
not much difference.
>>LISA: There's no
difference, really.
>>DOSSEY: There's
hardly any difference.
And so then the
question becomes, well,
what's going on here
if the strategy doesn't
happen to be of any consequence?
And it all boils down to love.
Because if you ask all
of those healers who
use these different
strategies, what's
the most important thing?
They'll say you've got to care.
You have got to feel it in
your heart, as we were saying,
and there has to be a real
heart connection here.
So love trumps religion.
>>LISA: It does.
It trumps science.
>>DOSSEY: It trumps everything
where this is concerned.
>>LISA: I've had the
amazing opportunity
to sit in this
chair and interview
visionaries such
as yourself, and do
you know how most of
those interviews end?
The same way.
>>DOSSEY: I love that.
>>LISA: The same way.
>>DOSSEY: I love it
when that happens.
>>LISA: Whether
or not I'm talking
about near-death experiences,
ancient civilizations, healing,
biology-- it all
comes down to love.
It is absolutely amazing.
We should put a reel
together of all the people
who said it comes down to love.
>>DOSSEY: Yeah, well, that
would be fascinating to do.
>>LISA: It would
because it's true.
>>DOSSEY: And if you try
to tease apart, break up,
what is this love business?
I mean, what's implied?
>>LISA: Right.
>>DOSSEY: And I think it's
the breakdown of boundaries
between people.
We build walls between each
other, as rugged individuals.
Our national ethos is built
on rugged individuality.
But love is the
opposite of that.
Love is a willingness
to break down
the barrier of separation
between people.
Actually, this gives
me an opportunity
to make a shameless
advertisement for a book
that I have finished.
>>LISA: Oh, good.
>>DOSSEY: It will be
published in a few months.
It's called "The One Mind,"
how our individual minds are
part of a greater mind
and why it matters.
And the theme of the
book-- it goes back
through history viewing all of
the spiritual and philosophical
traditions which say
that, at some level,
there is an enveloping,
universal mind
of which our minds are a part.
And realizing that
requires the breakdown
of boundaries that
separate you from all
the other consciousnesses
and the one
mind of which we're a part.
And when people really do
this, healing power flourishes,
love blossoms--
>>LISA: Lives get easier.
Finances probably improve.
>>DOSSEY: Often.
So I think that love is
a very fascinating idea.
But we have to get through
the romantic notion of it,
and the cultural versions.
>>LISA: It has the same
connotation that prayer has.
It's got a certain
image around love.
But I mean, if you
think about it,
has anyone at their
death bed ever said,
I really wish I would
have hated somebody more.
No.
It's the opposite.
It's, I wish I would have
healed that relationship
with my brother or mother.
I wish I would have let
go of that resentment.
I wish I'd forgiven
myself for this, that,
and the other that's all that
overarching theme of what
the universal love is.
And it's done from a
scientific perspective.
It's from a religious
perspective.
It's from a personal
development perspective.
Any way you look at it, it
all boils down to that theme.
>>DOSSEY: I've had a fascinating
experience researching this
book on the one mind in terms
of looking at near-death
experiences where people after
death feel that they're united
with--
>>LISA: All of consciousness.
>>DOSSEY: --all there is, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>DOSSEY: That's one thing.
The other thing
is they experience
an overwhelming, ineffable
sense of overpowering love.
And they almost all
come back saying,
I have never experienced
anything like this in my life.
And this is transformative.
When they come back,
this changes their life.
>>LISA: Yes, it's
absolutely phenomenal.
It is absolutely phenomenal.
So I want to end with
a prayer, if you can.
So if people are trying to
figure out how to do this,
and if they want to
learn what it is, what
is a way to do this
right now on this show?
>>DOSSEY: Well, I want to refer
to my favorite prayer, which
I offer to everybody as a
sort of an ecumenical prayer
for anyone who is
interested in healing.
This prayer is called
The Physician's Prayer,
and it was written by a fabulous
character, Moses Maimonides,
in the 12th century,
who was a rabbi.
He was the personal physician
to the king of Egypt.
And this prayer is often
used at graduation ceremonies
in medical schools and so on.
So here is--
>>LISA: The prayer of-- OK.
>>DOSSEY: --of Moses Maimonides.
>>LISA: How does it go?
>>DOSSEY: "You have
chosen me to watch over
the life and health
of your creatures.
I'm about to apply myself to
the duties of my profession.
Almighty God, support
me in this great work
that it may benefit my
fellow creatures because,
without your help, even the
least thing will not succeed.
Permit not thirst for
profit or ambition
for renown to interfere with
the duties of my profession.
These enemies of
truth can lead astray
in the great task of
attending to the well-being
of your creatures.
Preserve my physical
and spiritual strength
that I may cheerfully be of help
to rich and poor, good and bad,
friend and foe alike.
Let me see only the human
being in the sufferer."
>>LISA: That last sentence
right there is-- now
I understand why it's
the physician's prayer.
You see the human being.
You see the healing
ability in the patient.
>>DOSSEY: Yeah.
And it also implies
the breakdown
of boundaries separating
a patient from a doctor,
all the hierarchy's done away
with, love comes to the fore,
and caring predominates.
>>LISA: That's amazing,
because then it's
a co-creation in the
healing experience
rather than, I will heal you,
you will then heal yourself.
And it's a co-healing
that happens.
>>DOSSEY: We used to know
this, and we forgot it.
If you look at the origin
of the word diagnosis,
we usually say, that's something
the doctor does, right?
He makes a diagnosis.
But dia- gnosis, the
original meaning of the word,
is a knowing that occurs
between two people.
>>LISA: Oh, that's
what it means,
a knowing that occurs
between two people.
>>DOSSEY: That's right.
>>LISA: Yes, and to relinquish
your healing to another person
is never a good idea.
It's about self-healing
ultimately,
because you're the ultimate
one who heals yourself
with the guidance of
medicine or prayer
and showing how effective it is.
There's no way you cannot do
this, knowing what you know.
>>DOSSEY: I feel that way.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>DOSSEY: Knowing
what we know, it
would be like refusing
an appendectomy
if you have appendicitis.
It's crazy.
It makes no sense
to refuse something
that's that strong and powerful.
>>LISA: That could
save your life.
And there's-- yes, absolutely.
Well, thank you so much.
I really enjoyed this.
I've enjoyed learning
about more and more
of your stories and
your life and so forth.
I really enjoyed that.
And I look forward
to your next book
as well, because that
sounds really good, too.
>>DOSSEY: It's going
to be really good.
>>LISA: I'm sure it is.
Thank you so much.
>>DOSSEY: I enjoyed it.
Thanks so, Lisa.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.